source/assignments/classwork/probability/02_CONDITIONAL.rst, before:

.. _conditional_classwork:

=======================
Conditional Probability 
=======================

Applications 
------------

1. In a highschool, there are 287 students. 92 of the students play football. 50 of them play football *and* basketball. What is the probability a randomly selected football player also plays basketball?
   
2. A bag contains 3 red marbles and 4 blue marbles. Two marbles are drawn at random *without replacement*. If the first marble drawn is red, what is the probability the second marble is blue?

3. In a sample of 100 adultS, 45 of them owned a dog, 30 of them owned a cat and 18 of them owned a dog and a cat. What percentage of those who have a dog also have a cat?

4. Suppose two fair dice have been tossed.

    a. What is the probability of a sum of 5 if they land on different numbers?

    b. If the total of their top faces is found to be divisible by 5, what is the probability that both of them have landed on five?

5. A box contains three coins: two regular coins and a double-sided coin with heads on both sides. You select a coin at random and flip it. 

    a. What is the probability it lands heads up?

    b. If it lands heads up, what is the probability you have selected the double-sided coin?

6. You are given the following :ref:`Venn Diagram <venn_diagrams>` below. 

    a. Find :math:`P(A \mid B)`

    b. Find :math:`P(B \mid A)`

.. image:: ../../../assets/imgs/problems/conditional_probability_venn_diagram.jpg
    :align: center

1. Paging through a magazine, you notice a interesting survey of randomly selected individuals who were each asked two questions. The first question was "Do you believe the Earth is flat or round?". The second question was, "Do you think Finland is a `real country <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/finland-does-not-exist>`?" The results are given in the table below, 

+---------+------+-------+
|         | Flat | Round |
+---------+------+-------+
| Exists  | 15   | 120   |
+---------+------+-------+
| Doesn't | 12   | 35    |
+---------+------+-------+

    a. Draw a :ref:`Venn Diagram <venn_diagrams>` that represents the results.

    b. How many people were included in this survey?

    c. What is the probability a randomly selected in this survey person believes the Earth is flat?

    d. What is the probability a randomly selected in this survey person believes Finland doesn't exist?

    e. Of the people who believe the Earth is round, what percentage of them believe Finland exists?

    f. If a randomly selected person believes Finland doesn't exist, what is the probability he or she believes the Earth is flat?

    g. If a randomly selected person believes the Earth is flat, what is the probability he or she doesn't believe Finland exists?

    h. **Spoiler Alert** Why is the answer to *part f* different from the answer to *part g*?

.. warning:: 

    Challenge Problem Ahead

8. In a small lake, it is estimated that there are approximately 105 fish, of which 40 are trout and 64 are carp. A fisherman caught eight fish. What is the probability that exactly two of them are trout if we know that at least three of them are not?

.. hint:: 

    :ref:`Reduce the sample space <reduction_of_the_sample_space>` and then use :math:`combinatorics`.

Law of Intersections
--------------------

9. You shuffle a deck of playing cards and deal yourself two cards at random.

    a. If the first card is a king, what is the probability the second card is a king?

    b. What is the probability both cards are kings? 

    c. What is the difference between the meanings of *part a* and *part b*?

10. 100 sci-fi fans were polled by the reporters at  *Imporant News Weekly*. 64 of those polled preferred *Star Wars* to *Star Trek*, while the rest of them, due to poor life choices, preferred *Star Trek* to *Star Wars*. Of the people who preferred *Star Wars*, 75% of them thought *The Empire Strikes Back* was the best of the film in the `ennealogy <https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ennealogy>_`. Of the people who preferred *Star Trek*, only half of them thought *The Empire Strike Back* was the best film in the series. 

    a. What percent of people preferred *Star Wars* over *Star Trek* and thought *The Empire Strikes Back* was the best film in the series?

    b. What percent of people preferred *Star Trek* over *Star Wars* and thought *The Empire Strikes Back* **wasn't** the best film in the series? 


ONE OR TWO MORE

Independence
------------

TODO

A.P. Exam Practice
------------------

1. **2018 Free Response, #3**

Approximately 3.5 percent of all children born in a certain region are from multiple births (that is, twins, triplets, etc.). Of the children born in the region who are from multiple births, 22 percent are left-handed. Of the children born in the region who are from single births, 11 percent are left-handed.

a. What is the probability that a randomly selected child born in the region is left-handed?

b. What is the probability that a randomly selected child born in the region is a child from a multiple birth, given that the child selected is left-handed?

c. A random sample of 20 children born in the region will be selected. What is the probability that the sample will have at least 3 children who are left-handed?

2. **2016, #Free Response, #3**

A medical researcher surveyed a large group of men and women about whether they take medicine as prescribed. The responses were categorized as never, sometimes, or always. The relative frequency of each category is shown in the table.

.. image:: ../../../assets/imgs/classwork/2019_apstats_frp_3.png
    :align: center

One person from those surveyed will be selected at random.

a. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never and who is a woman?

b. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never or who is a woman?

c. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never given that the person is a woman?

d. For the people surveyed, are the events of being a person whose response is never and being a woman independent? Justify your answer.

e. Assume that, in a large population, the probability that a person will always take medicine as prescribed is 0.54. If 5 people are selected at random from the population, what is the probability that at least 4 of the people selected will always take medicine as prescribed? Support your answer.

Commit message:

adding celebration of knowledge, more exam practice problems

source/assignments/classwork/probability/02_CONDITIONAL.rst, after:

.. _conditional_classwork:

=======================
Conditional Probability 
=======================

Applications 
------------

1. In a highschool, there are 287 students. 92 of the students play football. 50 of them play football *and* basketball. What is the probability a randomly selected football player also plays basketball?
   
2. A bag contains 3 red marbles and 4 blue marbles. Two marbles are drawn at random *without replacement*. If the first marble drawn is red, what is the probability the second marble is blue?

3. In a sample of 100 adultS, 45 of them owned a dog, 30 of them owned a cat and 18 of them owned a dog and a cat. What percentage of those who have a dog also have a cat?

4. Suppose two fair dice have been tossed.

    a. What is the probability of a sum of 5 if they land on different numbers?

    b. If the total of their top faces is found to be divisible by 5, what is the probability that both of them have landed on five?

5. A box contains three coins: two regular coins and a double-sided coin with heads on both sides. You select a coin at random and flip it. 

    a. What is the probability it lands heads up?

    b. If it lands heads up, what is the probability you have selected the double-sided coin?

6. You are given the following :ref:`Venn Diagram <venn_diagrams>` below. 

    a. Find :math:`P(A \mid B)`

    b. Find :math:`P(B \mid A)`

.. image:: ../../../assets/imgs/problems/conditional_probability_venn_diagram.jpg
    :align: center

1. Paging through a magazine, you notice a interesting survey of randomly selected individuals who were each asked two questions. The first question was "Do you believe the Earth is flat or round?". The second question was, "Do you think Finland is a `real country <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/finland-does-not-exist>`?" The results are given in the table below, 

+---------+------+-------+
|         | Flat | Round |
+---------+------+-------+
| Exists  | 15   | 120   |
+---------+------+-------+
| Doesn't | 12   | 35    |
+---------+------+-------+

    a. Draw a :ref:`Venn Diagram <venn_diagrams>` that represents the results.

    b. How many people were included in this survey?

    c. What is the probability a randomly selected in this survey person believes the Earth is flat?

    d. What is the probability a randomly selected in this survey person believes Finland doesn't exist?

    e. Of the people who believe the Earth is round, what percentage of them believe Finland exists?

    f. If a randomly selected person believes Finland doesn't exist, what is the probability he or she believes the Earth is flat?

    g. If a randomly selected person believes the Earth is flat, what is the probability he or she doesn't believe Finland exists?

    h. **Spoiler Alert** Why is the answer to *part f* different from the answer to *part g*?

.. warning:: 

    Challenge Problem Ahead

8. In a small lake, it is estimated that there are approximately 105 fish, of which 40 are trout and 64 are carp. A fisherman caught eight fish. What is the probability that exactly two of them are trout if we know that at least three of them are not?

.. hint:: 

    :ref:`Reduce the sample space <reduction_of_the_sample_space>` and then use :math:`combinatorics`.

Law of Intersections
--------------------

9. You shuffle a deck of playing cards and deal yourself two cards at random.

    a. If the first card is a king, what is the probability the second card is a king?

    b. What is the probability both cards are kings? 

    c. What is the difference between the meanings of *part a* and *part b*?

10. 100 sci-fi fans were polled by the reporters at  *Imporant News Weekly*. 64 of those polled preferred *Star Wars* to *Star Trek*, while the rest of them, due to poor life choices, preferred *Star Trek* to *Star Wars*. Of the people who preferred *Star Wars*, 75% of them thought *The Empire Strikes Back* was the best of the film in the `ennealogy <https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ennealogy>_`. Of the people who preferred *Star Trek*, only half of them thought *The Empire Strike Back* was the best film in the series. 

    a. What percent of people preferred *Star Wars* over *Star Trek* and thought *The Empire Strikes Back* was the best film in the series?

    b. What percent of people preferred *Star Trek* over *Star Wars* and thought *The Empire Strikes Back* **wasn't** the best film in the series? 


ONE OR TWO MORE

Independence
------------

TODO

A.P. Exam Practice
------------------

1. **2018 Free Response, #3**

Approximately 3.5 percent of all children born in a certain region are from multiple births (that is, twins, triplets, etc.). Of the children born in the region who are from multiple births, 22 percent are left-handed. Of the children born in the region who are from single births, 11 percent are left-handed.

a. What is the probability that a randomly selected child born in the region is left-handed?

b. What is the probability that a randomly selected child born in the region is a child from a multiple birth, given that the child selected is left-handed?

c. A random sample of 20 children born in the region will be selected. What is the probability that the sample will have at least 3 children who are left-handed?

2. **2016, Free Response, #3**

A medical researcher surveyed a large group of men and women about whether they take medicine as prescribed. The responses were categorized as never, sometimes, or always. The relative frequency of each category is shown in the table.

.. image:: ../../../assets/imgs/classwork/2019_apstats_frp_3.png
    :align: center

One person from those surveyed will be selected at random.

a. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never and who is a woman?

b. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never or who is a woman?

c. What is the probability that the person selected will be someone whose response is never given that the person is a woman?

d. For the people surveyed, are the events of being a person whose response is never and being a woman independent? Justify your answer.

e. Assume that, in a large population, the probability that a person will always take medicine as prescribed is 0.54. If 5 people are selected at random from the population, what is the probability that at least 4 of the people selected will always take medicine as prescribed? Support your answer.

3. **2009, Free Response Form B, #2**

The ELISA tests whether a patient has contracted HIV. The ELISA is said to be positive if it indicates that HIV is present in a blood sample, and the ELISA is said to be negative if it does not indicate that HIV is present in a blood sample. Instead of directly measuring the presence of HIV, the ELISA measures levels of antibodies in the blood that should be elevated if HIV is present. Because of variability in antibody levels among human patients, the ELISA does not always indicate the correct result.

As part of a training program, staff at a testing lab applied the ELISA to 500 blood samples known to contain HIV. The ELISA was positive for 489 of those blood samples and negative for the other 11 samples. As part of the same training program, the staff also applied the ELISA to 500 other blood samples known to not contain HIV. The ELISA was positive for 37 of those blood samples and negative for the other 463 samples.

a. When a new blood sample arrives at the lab, it will be tested to determine whether HIV is present. Using the data from the training program, estimate the probability that the ELISA would be positive when it is applied to a blood sample that does not contain HIV.

b. Among the blood samples examined in the training program that provided positive ELISA results for HIV, what proportion actually contained HIV?

c. When a blood sample yields a positive ELISA result, two more ELISAs are performed on the same blood sample. If at least one of the two additional ELISAs is positive, the blood sample is subjected to a more expensive and more accurate test to make a definitive determination of whether HIV is present in the sample. Repeated ELISAs on the same sample are generally assumed to be independent. Under the assumption of independence, what is the probability that a new blood sample that comes into the lab will be subjected to the more expensive test if that sample does not contain HIV?
